My name is John Signa.
I am the technology manager for Mac OS X,
and I focus on the Core OS,
covering drivers, file systems,
and networking.
And I'd like to welcome
you to the I/O Kit session.
It's really good to see we
have a full house today.
How many of you like the I/O Kit demos
that have happened so far?
We've been doing a ton of them.
In case you haven't noticed,
they've done some in the Carbon session,
some in the Keynote.
Let's see them do those fancy
graphics demos without the
display drivers and so forth.
Those are the cool demos.
The drivers are working.
So to tell you actually how
you can actually get your
devices working with Mac OS X,
I would now like to introduce Dean Reece,
who is the manager of the
I/O Kit engineering team.
Dean Reece.
Good afternoon.
Thanks for coming out.
It's good to see you all here.
So if you've come to previous WWDCs,
you've probably seen me up
here before talking about
what I/O Kit is going to be.
And this year,
I'm going to talk to you a lot
about what it is and has been
and is going to evolve into.
So we've got a little bit of history,
and we've also got some
future direction for you.
So let's get started.
So I'm sure you've seen
plenty of these by now.
This is sort of the view from orbit,
and we'll be getting closer and closer.
So we're going to be focusing
in on the very bottom box here,
the Darwin section.
And of course, within that,
we'll be focusing in a little
bit finer on I/O Kit and drivers.
So today we'll talk a little bit
about the current state of I/O Kit,
and then we'll spend a little time
talking about developing code to
run inside the Mac OS X kernel,
because there are some very special
conditions that you have to follow
to be successful at doing that,
that are definitely different
than what you would encounter
doing application development.
We're also going to spend some time
talking about the I/O registry,
because this is probably the
single most important element that
is in the core part of I/O Kit.
This is used by all families,
and all drivers will be involved in it,
whether they know it or not.
We're also going to talk a little
bit about our user-client model.
Basically,
drivers live inside the kernel,
users don't.
So you have to get-- wow, they like that.
So we're going to have to figure
out a way to move the data
across the user kernel boundary.
And there are a number of ways
of doing that inside Mac OS X.
I/O Kit has a small bag
of tricks for doing this.
And there are other mechanisms available,
but we'll talk about those.
And then I'm going to spend, actually,
some good amount of time this year
going down each individual family
and explaining where we stand,
where we're going,
and directing you to what other
sessions are coming up that will
actually give you some details
about how to use those families.
So let's get started.
What is I/O Kit?
So there's really two main
definitions that I use.
And the first one is it makes it
as easy as possible to develop
correct Mac OS X drivers.
Now, kind of a vague blanket statement.
We'll get back to the word
correct a little bit later.
But that is basically our goal.
We're a framework that's
intended to enable all of you
to write drivers for Mac OS X.
That's its primary purpose.
Would you like fries with that driver?
We're a service organization.
So the next one,
the other definition is not from
the driver-writer perspective,
but what does I/O Kit do
from the system perspective?
And that is,
it provides software abstractions
for all the hardware on your system.
Because if there's not a way
to find a device from software,
apps aren't going to talk to it.
And more from a tactical perspective,
I/O Kit is delivered as
part of the Mac OS X KDK,
the Kernel Developer Kit.
And we've kind of broken from
the traditional DDK terminology,
because it's not just
for writing drivers.
It's writing all kernel
extensions for Mac OS X.
So I/O Kit is in there.
So who is I/O Kit for?
Well, if you're writing a device driver,
there's a good chance I/O Kit is for you.
There's a little bit of special
language here that we add in,
is if your driver must run
inside the Mac OS X kernel,
then you use I/O Kit.
Now, we'll be talking a little bit more
later about why you would or would
not be running inside the kernel.
Ideally, we put as much code as
possible outside of the kernel,
for reasons I'll get into later.
But keep this in mind throughout
the whole presentation.
When you're thinking about
your software product,
you need to be thinking about where
does it need to fit into Mac OS X.
And I'll be giving you clues all
along as the subjects come up.
But as an example, printer drivers do not
live inside the kernel.
They live actually inside
the printer framework,
and there's a session to
talk about how to do those.
Also, developers of applications that
need to talk to devices directly.
By directly,
I mean there's a-- a USB security dongle,
and you've got an application that
wants to directly talk to that dongle.
Indirectly would be your
application wants to talk to files.
Well, obviously,
the file systems live on devices.
In that case, by going through the file
system to access files,
you are, of course, getting to a device.
But I don't consider that direct access.
That's not really an I/O Kit thing.
But also-- OK, I've already talked
about the third point,
so I got out of order for myself.
So the state of I/O Kit.
Last year, we first shipped
I/O Kit code in binary form.
The developer preview that we gave
out was actually running on I/O Kit.
All I/Os were going through it.
But it was not quite mature enough or
stable enough to give to developers
because we didn't want to misdirect them.
We knew there were areas that
were changing and improving.
So that was the first time it
ever really saw the light of day.
Then last February,
we shipped the first KDK,
and inside of that was a lot of I/O Kit,
but not all of it.
We had the KDK elements
for a number of families,
like USB and SCSI and so on,
but it wasn't complete.
Now, with this year, with DP4,
we've given you an updated KDK,
it's actually part of the CD,
and you might look on there trying
to find a package that says KDK.
We haven't broken it
out as a separate thing.
When you install the developer package,
you get all of the KDK bits.
There are still some
things that are missing.
We'll go over exactly what's
there and what's not there,
but we're continuing to add more.
And in June,
we intend to ship an add-on for
DP4 that you would be able to
install that would add even more,
and would update a few things.
So we're making progress here,
and hopefully we've gotten to the point
now where most of you can get started.
Many of you, if not most of you,
will actually be able to
complete your work based on DP4.
Some of you will have to wait
for additional support from
Apple before you can get going,
but we'll get into who you
are and how you would go about
getting that information.
So Mac OS X uses kernel
extensions to extend the kernel.
Simply put, a kernel extension is
just a wrapper for code.
It's a way to get a chunk of
binary code linked into the
kernel and get it executing.
And each environment, like I/O Kit is an
environment inside the kernel,
the network kernel extension support
is an environment inside the kernel,
and the file system
plug-in is an environment.
Each of these environments have
their own set of APIs that a
driver developer would use to,
excuse me, a software developer would use
to get at the services they need.
So, at the top level,
a kernel extension is just
a way to deliver the code.
It doesn't actually have
any real API in it yet.
The other thing I want to say about
kernel extensions is they're not
synonymous with Mac OS 9 extensions.
Now, there are certainly Mac OS 9
extensions that would map to
kernel extensions in Mac OS X.
But this is not an
assumption you want to make.
You want to consider very carefully
where your software fits into Mac OS X.
So, an example would be a foreign file
system plug-in extension would be
a file system plug-in in Mac OS X.
So, it would be a kernel
extension in that case.
But a shared library in Mac OS 9 is not
going to be a kernel extension in X.
We have other ways to
deliver that functionality.
Now that being said, I will reiterate,
you should only put your code
inside the kernel if you have to.
And here's some of the reasons.
When you develop inside a kernel,
you are, first off,
you have to use our tools right now.
I don't believe there's an
alternative tool set available
to develop kernel extensions.
If there is,
I certainly am not aware of it.
Now, it's certainly,
we will work with any developer
that is building IDEs and wants
to be able to have a tool to
develop Mac OS X kernel extensions,
but it's going to be their products.
They have to drive that development.
So, just to be clear,
Apple will provide you with an
IDE for developing kernel extensions.
And we will work with third
parties to get their tools up to
speed if that's their intention.
The other thing about developing
in the kernel is debugging.
Has to be done using a tech tool.
So, we will be using a two
machine debug environment.
And this is done not over a serial port,
but over Ethernet.
So, what happens is you have one
machine that actually has the
kernel extension you are testing.
And that's connected on the same Ethernet
segment to a host machine where typically
you'll also be doing your development,
which will have GDB running over there.
You'll attach to the kernel
running on your target machine.
You'll be able to stop it,
single step it, look at the stacks,
look at memory, things like that.
It is not as seamless as it looks.
It is as seamless a debugging experience
as you would get with applications.
We are going to work on improving it,
but it's not probably ever going
to be as glitzy as application,
you know,
GUI application debugging because it's
just a very different development style.
Also,
there are limited language features.
And this is-- we talked about
this a little bit last year.
I/O Kit uses C++ object-oriented
structures for managing a lot
of the way our framework works.
But we've restricted what
features of C++ we use.
And we've done this for a couple reasons.
Probably the most
important is for stability.
The entire Mac OS X kernel is not in C++.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so the next issue with developing
inside the kernel is that you can't
directly interact with the user.
Now,
we do have some services that will allow
your code to throw up alert panels,
for example.
In general, though,
the theory is that drivers
should drive hardware,
and you should have some
higher-level policymaker deciding
what the user experience is.
There are a few cases, however,
a good example would be an
encrypted disk that needs a
password before it can be mounted,
where it may be reasonable for the
driver to actually throw up some UI.
We have some resources for that
coming in to later releases,
but for now at least,
if you want to have a user
entity interact with a driver,
you have to write both pieces of code.
You have to have a user
piece that communicates with
the driver to throw up UI.
The other thing about developing inside
the kernel that you have to keep in mind,
I can't stress this enough,
resources inside the kernel are
more expensive than user resources.
And what I mean by that,
kernel memory is by default wired.
You don't want to take page faults
when running inside the kernel,
because that can lead to various problems
that will end up with a dead machine.
So effectively, when you allocate a K of
memory inside the kernel,
that's a K of memory that isn't
available to any application,
no matter whether they're
paged out or paged in or what.
If you allocate a K of
memory in an application,
and that application is idle,
then it's going to be paged out as
part of the application's working set,
and other applications will be hot.
So effectively, memory inside the kernel
is much more expensive.
There are other resource issues
inside the kernel as well,
but memory is really the
one you want to look at.
Also, failures are fatal.
If you crash inside the kernel,
you've crashed the entire machine.
You've panicked the kernel.
An application,
something running outside of the kernel,
only crashes itself, its own process.
So these are all good reasons
to stay outside the kernel.
Now, of course,
a lot of you are going to have to
develop code that runs inside the kernel,
and that's fine.
We intend-- I have lots of no
lifeguard on duty warnings and so on.
But we do it all the time.
There's quite a lot of code and
quite a lot of drivers that we
develop and put inside the kernel.
So it is possible.
And to get you started with this,
we've put together a few tutorials.
Now, in DP4,
these tutorials show you how to
generate first a Hello Kernel extension.
This is just sort of the minimal
piece of code that will load in,
it will log a message to the
console when it's loaded,
then you can manually unload it,
it will log a message saying goodbye,
and it will unload.
And you can sit there and load
it and unload it and load it
and unload it and experiment.
It's a great way for you to get
started because it shows you how to
go through your development cycle.
It gives you the skills you
need to build a project,
get it loaded, see that it's loaded,
and then you can start adding
code and experimenting with APIs.
The second tutorial is I/O Kit focused,
and this is called Hello I/O Kit.
It layers on top of the first one in the
sense that it adds I/O Kit-specific APIs.
It shows you some of the basic entry
points like start and stop that most
driver writers are going to need
to override and do something with.
It also shows you a little bit
about the way our matching works.
These tutorials, by the way,
are not intended to educate you as to
why you are doing all of these things.
They are intended to walk you
through the steps so that you
can then begin to experiment.
We are working on some improved
versions of these tutorials.
Both of them, by the way,
show you the project builder web objects.
The I/O Kit is a new interface,
excuse me, IDE.
So when you follow these instructions,
you'll be using the older
style project builder,
and then you will build these projects.
You can import them into
the new project builder,
the fancier one, and you can, I believe,
continue to make progress there.
In the June KDK that I mentioned,
we intend to cut over all development
of drivers to the new project builder.
And at that point,
we'll give you new tutorials
that show you how to create those
projects in the new project builder.
But they do work as expected now
using the old project builder,
project builder web objects.
Oh, the second tutorial that talks
about I/O Kit also spends a good bit
of time showing you how to set up
the two machine debug environment.
This is going to be a tricky step
for a lot of you if you don't
have Unix or GDB experience.
It requires that you spend some time
at the command line and manipulating
some files in a way that won't be
immediately familiar to a lot of you.
So just be patient and work through it.
It's an important skill to have.
And I assure you it is possible,
it does work.
It's very,
very powerful once you get it connected.
So these are exercises you
should all be going through,
I think.
So I/O Kit's design goals.
In the very early slide,
I told you that I/O Kit is to
help you write correct drivers.
Well, this is where I talk about
what I mean by correct.
The Mac OS X kernel environment
has some real complexity to it,
and I/O Kit is there to help
smooth over a lot of it.
MP and preemption.
The Mac OS X kernel is intended to
be able to run on an MP machine,
and as it works out,
the software constructs are more
or less identical to what you
need to support kernel preemption,
which we will be turning on at some point
to get better real-time performance.
For those of you that have not developed
software that either runs on MP or
runs in a preemptive environment,
there's a lot of stuff you have to
do to protect your data because you
might have code that gets re-entered.
I/O Kit has some primitives,
Command Gate and Work Loop and
a few other things that help you
thread your driver accordingly so
that you get the expected behavior
with the minimum amount of fuss.
This is not to say this is the
only way to thread your driver.
You have complete power to
write it however you want.
You can use a lot of the BSD locking
primitives if that's your preference.
We recommend, of course,
following the I/O Kit models that
you'll see in the example drivers.
You'll, I think, have a much quicker
bring-up of your driver.
But I/O Kit is not there to limit you,
it's simply there to assist you.
Another thing that the Mac OS X kernel
gives you is multiple address spaces.
The kernel runs in its own address space.
Each application also runs
in its own address space.
And by that I mean address 4000 is
going to mean something completely
different to each application
as it does to the kernel.
It may not be mapped at all in some
application or in the kernel space.
So when you write a driver that
receives a request from a user,
You've got to be aware of the fact that
that request may not be in an address
space that you can directly access.
You have to go through and either
copy it or map it into the kernel
address space and do some I/O.
Again, I/O Kit has some primitives
for making this easy.
By and large,
most of you won't have to do this because
if you follow what I/O Kit's done,
it comes for free.
Another thing that we have thought about
in I/O Kit is architecture neutrality.
The Darwin presentation the other day,
I guess yesterday,
you saw an Intel machine
running the Darwin kernel.
And one of the reasons that's
possible is I/O Kit has
built-in byte swap capabilities.
There's actually OS byte order, I think,
is the header that you look at.
But it allows you to write a driver
that can be compiled for architecture
of any Indianness and work correctly.
Now, I/O Kit drivers really are
intended to focus on mechanism.
And by that, I mean providing the conduit
for information to flow from the
operating system into the device.
We try to avoid having drivers
make user experience policies.
And one of the reasons for
that is we want to have a
more uniform user experience.
We'd like those policies to
be enforced at a higher level.
So the way a disk drive, for example,
is dealt with as far as whether it
mounts on the desktop or not shouldn't
be driven out of the device driver.
It should be driven out of something
higher level that looks at the volumes
and decides what's to mount or not.
This does also have the side effect of
making the drivers a little simpler for
you because you get to write the code
to deal with mechanism and not policy.
Another fundamental design goal we had
with I/O Kit is that we're not going to
do something that is private for Apple.
I/O Kit is not intended to be
Apple's private I/O system and,
oh, by the way,
third parties can maybe do a few things.
We're actually giving you the
power to write your own families.
You can pick a standard that Apple is
probably not going to do a family for,
like IEEE 488 or some other protocol.
You can define a standard set of headers.
You can public open source it in Darwin.
In fact, I would strongly encourage that.
If you do develop a family,
follow Apple's lead.
We're open sourcing our families.
You could do the same.
This gives you an opportunity
to present new API that other
developers can then build on and it
does it within a standard framework.
You don't have to invent your
own mechanism for doing this.
We actually have it built in.
So you have all the same
power that Apple does.
And as I said, their families are a
little bit different.
Another fundamental design
goal we had with I/O Kit,
the Mac OS X driver model,
how they are dynamically loaded,
and how to begin making your
own families work with Mac OS X.
families are open source so you can also
if you want to follow the Apple public
source license you can also lift our
code for your family and plagiarize
Okay, so I've talked a lot about
families and drivers.
I'm going to explain a little bit
about what the distinction is and why.
So I/O Kit is just a framework.
It doesn't understand anything
about particular protocols.
There's no built-in
SCSI support in I/O Kit proper.
So it's just a framework.
It's a bunch of services
for memory management,
interrupt management, device discovery,
matching and loading.
There's a lot there,
but it doesn't know anything
about particular devices.
So families are loadable chunks of code.
They are themselves kernel extensions.
Some of them are built
into our kernel for now,
but we intend to make all the families
loadable as kernel extensions.
And that's where the code that
deals with a protocol lives,
but not for a particular device.
So this is the middle piece.
So for example, all SCSI controllers have
some things in common.
The way they queue messages,
the way that maybe they'll
deal with error recovery,
the way they scan their bus.
These things are not something
that the controller driver,
the SIM writer,
wants to have to implement
every single time.
It also gives you the opportunity to
get wrong or get behavior different
from one controller to another.
The family is,
you can think of largely as a library
that provides that functionality for you.
And since it's object-oriented,
you can also override it.
So we give it to you, you can use it,
but you can also override it and say,
"You know,
I want to scan my SCSI devices in the
reverse order because I think it's
cooler that way." So we give it to you,
you can use it,
but you can also override it and say,
"You know,
I want to scan my SCSI devices in the
reverse order because I think it's
cooler that way." You have that power,
but we encourage you to take
advantage of the functionality we do
provide in the family superclasses.
So the device specifics
then go into a third piece,
which is the device driver.
And our intent is by the time you
get down to that level of code,
you're really only writing code to deal
with a particular piece of hardware
or a particular set of hardware.
That you don't have to worry
about scanning the SCSI bus.
All you have to do is be able to take a
SCSI command and push it out on the bus.
And when it completes,
call a completion routine.
That's it.
The superclass will make use of
that to cause the scanning to occur.
It's a very nice layering.
It's very powerful.
And we take advantage of KEXTs.
Kernel extensions really in this
case are a library mechanism.
And we have the built-in understanding
in KEXTs for dependencies.
So for example,
a SCSI controller driver would
be dependent on the SCSI family,
obviously.
But it's also going to be
dependent on typically this.
The PCI family because you're
making a PCI SCSI controller driver.
So what happens when you actually
go to load that device driver,
it's going to see,
the KEXT mechanism will see that
there's a dependency on both the
SCSI family and the PCI family.
And we'll make sure that they're
both loaded for you and that
you're linked against them.
And in fact, it's arbitrarily deep.
So let's say you have a
very complex product space,
and you have some code that can be
shared between a number of your drivers.
Well, cut and paste obviously works,
but that can be a real
maintenance burden.
But you can also introduce your
own sort of private family.
That is something that maybe
extends the SCSI family,
but isn't even a complete
driver in and of itself.
You can then have a set of drivers,
a small cloud of other drivers,
that then depend on that.
So it's a generic library mechanism.
It's actually very cool.
Once we got it working and
started using it ourselves,
we were actually pretty pleased
with how easily it is to work with.
So each family contains a set
of classes that present an
abstract view of a device.
Now, this is important because this
is the point of mix and match.
I/O Kit has a stacking mechanism so
that you can have any file system,
for example, talking to any disk drive.
Well, any implies that they all
look reasonably similar.
Well, this is the point at which
we make them look similar.
So first and foremost,
a family provides a set of
abstractions that you must conform to
if you are a device of that family.
A storage device, for example,
needs to have more or less the same
access APIs as some other storage device.
So you start with that base
class and you override.
We'll also include a lot
of functionality there.
As I said, minimally,
we provide the APIs.
We could get by with basically just a
virtual empty class and then require
you to do the entire implementation.
But our intent is to go a lot
farther and actually give you
as much of the implementation
as we believe is useful to you.
And a couple examples of that,
I/O PCI device is an abstraction
that every PCI device in the system
will be derived from this class.
Same I/O parallel SCSI controller,
same thing.
So ideally,
drivers will inherit most of the device's
independent details from the family.
Now, the other thing is that we
have an I/O prefix in front of
all the families of I/O Kit.
Apple is reserving this prefix.
We do intend to allow you
to introduce new families.
But for support reasons,
we ask that you release those families
with a different prefix other than I/O.
We'll talk about vendor
naming in just a minute.
But when you encounter a
class that has the I/O prefix,
that is officially part of Apple's
I/O Kit or one of its families.
And that means it's something that's
intended for developers to use.
It's either there for you to instantiate
or to subclass or to call into.
So drivers are leaf classes.
They basically have to be
because they need to be complete.
They have to drive hardware.
So for those of you not familiar
with object-oriented terminology,
a leaf class is simply
something that doesn't have
anything else building upon it.
It's the final implementation.
So in the class hierarchy,
what you would see is some classes
provided by I/O Kit proper,
and then some additional
subclassing going on in the family,
and then you would write the
final class in your driver.
It inherits a lot of
functionality from the family,
as I said before,
and it focuses on the details
of one specific device.
Now, for naming your drivers,
we use Apple as a prefix for our classes.
So when you, in Darwin,
encounter a class that starts with Apple,
you'll know that that actually is not
intended for a developer to extend.
That is what we consider a Leaf class.
It's one of our own device drivers.
Certainly a good choice as an example,
but probably not something
you should be subclassing.
Now, we have a namespace issue,
and that is in the Mac OS X kernel,
[Transcript missing]
Really,
it's only when you're defining them.
It's actually a pretty
flexible mechanism.
This is what we're intending
to go forward with,
but would welcome any feedback
from you as to alternatives
that you think might be better.
So I've talked about
families and drivers,
which are sort of static elements,
what goes where.
Talk a little bit more about
the dynamic aspects of I/O Kit.
When do things happen?
So driver matching is really
at the heart of our plug and
play and our hot swap story.
And in general,
matching is provided by the family.
The bulk of the matching
is provided there.
And the reason it goes there is
because matching typically depends
on device protocol specifics.
So you aren't going to, for example,
see SCSI device matching
overlap very much with,
say, FireWire device matching.
There may be some similarities,
but it's sufficiently different
that it makes sense to codify the
details of each bus in the family.
Now, we use a subtractive logic,
which means we start with the list of
all available drivers on the system.
And we remove them from the list
at each layer in our matching
system until we get down to one.
So the very first step is class matching.
As I said, we use classes to present
abstractions of devices.
I named IOPCI device as an example.
So you could pretty easily declare
that my driver will only talk to
something of class IOPCI device.
And when a PCI device nub pops
up and wants to be matched,
it's going to ask for a list of
everything that can consume it.
So I'm going to say,
I'm going to use this list of everything
that can consume IOPCI device objects.
And that will eliminate a
tremendous number of drivers
from the list right there.
Obviously,
USB device drivers need not apply.
So that's done in I/O Kit proper.
That's part of a service
we call the I/O Catalog.
And once that's done,
it's up to the family to take that
list of drivers and then apply
what we call passive matching.
Now the reason we call
it passive matching,
it's passive from the driver
developer's point of view.
The person writing the driver
doesn't write any code here.
You're going to put some matching
strings in your definition file,
and the family will look at that file
and look at those strings and decide
if you're a candidate for further
matching or if you should be excluded.
So for example, in PCI,
you can use a name match,
which is sort of derived from
the open firmware device naming,
or you can use vendor ID and
device ID with a wild mask right
out of the PCI config space.
Different families, as I said,
will apply different logic here,
but it allows you to very quickly
whittle down the list of drivers
to a couple that are appropriate.
Now, one of the things that we did not
want to do was invent a new language.
We could very easily have gone overboard
and put in all sorts of regular
expression goo and had the passive
matching be just incredibly powerful.
But we decided that C++ is
already a pretty good language.
Some people will debate that.
But it's certainly something
that our compiler already
supports and is very flexible.
So we came up with a third stage,
which we call active matching.
And as the term implies,
this means the driver being
matched is active in this process.
Its probe entry point gets called
with a reference to the thing
it's being matched against.
And it's then up to the driver
to actually talk to the thing.
Is this one of my devices?
Is it something I can talk to?
This is sort of the ultimate catch-all.
Ideally, we want to filter out as much
as we can in passive matching.
But realistically,
we know you're never going to
get 100%. So active matching
gives us the hooks to do very,
very thorough matching.
It also allows you to make decisions
based on dynamic characteristics.
Do I want to match this right now?
Whereas passive matching is static.
You set the strings once,
and you'll match or not based on that.
Now, this scheme allows for ties.
You can have multiple drivers that all
claim to be able to drive a device.
And we wanted to come up with
a reasonably safe mechanism
for breaking those ties,
and it's simply based on scores.
Our theory is that a more generic
driver should lose out to a more
specific driver when both of them
claim to be able to drive a device.
In practice with I/O Kit,
we have not run into cases where we have
We have collisions past this point.
It is entirely possible that somebody
else writes a generic driver that
has the same match score as the
Apple-provided generic driver.
And in this case, right now, the system,
I think,
picks the first one that it sees.
We might improve on this if
it proves to be necessary,
but I suspect that what we
have here is flexible and
powerful enough to be complete.
There's a lot you can do here.
If you're writing a family,
it's your responsibility
to do the passive matching.
Class matching, as I said,
is done by I/O Kit proper,
and the active matching is
done by the driver writer.
All right, the I/O Registry is
very central to I/O Kit.
It is sort of the glue
that holds it all together.
I've said object, object,
object quite a bit up here.
Well,
I/O Registry is the collection of all the
objects that make up the running system.
So if you imagine that each device
driver is represented by a single object,
and some of the other
device abstractions,
like partitions on a disk are
represented by single objects,
you have this sort of cloud of objects.
Well,
the Iowa registry ties them all together.
It's dynamic.
It's the collection of
actual live running drivers.
I want to call it a database,
but that implies, you know,
[Transcript missing]
Also, every driver has a property list,
and this is incredibly important
in the registry and in an I/O Kit.
The property list is really a
description of random properties that,
some of them are things that we
declare that you need for the family,
some of them are just notes
that you care to put in there.
It is a collection,
typically a dictionary,
and a dictionary is a
named set of values.
So, for example, a driver would have a
property called version,
and you could do a
The I/O Kit is a very simple,
easy-to-use software that
allows you to create a lot of
different types of I/O Kit.
It's a very simple,
easy-to-use software that
allows you to create a lot of
different types of I/O Kit.
It's a very simple,
easy-to-use software that
allows you to create a lot of
different types of I/O Kit.
The I/O Kit is a very simple,
easy-to-use software that
allows you to create a lot of
different types of I/O Kit.
It's a very simple,
easy-to-use software that allows you
to create list file in your driver
as part of the kernel extension.
And in there,
you put in your primordial property list.
So later on, when you actually get
down to running your code,
that same bit of data is given to you.
And you can then use
that as input parameters.
You can also use it,
once you've gotten it,
as a dynamic communication mechanism.
There are libraries available to allow
an application to scan the registry
looking for a particular object,
either by its type or by some
property in this property list.
And once you've found the object,
you can do get property and
set property calls on it.
And the driver can just allow
those calls to communicate with
its property list directly,
or it can override them.
And this is where it gets cool.
So an application can do a set property,
say it wants to send a password down.
The driver receives
the set property call,
and because they've
overridden set property,
they look at the property being
set and see that it's my password.
And they intercept that call,
they do something special,
and they don't actually have to
put the password into the registry.
You can actually kind of hijack that
as a communication mechanism for low
bandwidth configuration-y type stuff.
I know a lot of driver developers
will use this for turning
on and off verbose mode.
You can do a set property verbose
and set it to some number,
and then your driver can receive
that call and do something with it.
So it's very open-ended as
to what you can do with this.
So how do you see it and
how do you get at it?
It's important that you, I think,
understand what it's there
for and how it's used.
So we've put an application together.
It's actually a pretty nice
graphical application called
I/O Registry Explorer.app.
It was present in the KDK that
we shipped last February,
and it's present again in
DP4 and will continue to be
present as a developer tool.
It allows you to use a browser view to
walk through any plane of the registry.
So by default, it lets you walk through
the service plane,
but it will allow you to switch planes,
I believe.
Once you land on a driver,
it also shows you the
property list for that driver.
So we don't yet have the ability to
allow you to change those properties,
but right now, today,
you can take a look at the actual
set of drivers running in your
system and what properties they
have and how they're being used.
And it's great just to sit
down and explore and see how
the thing's put together.
Now, for Darwin developers
that don't have the GUI,
or if you're just interested in, say,
maybe piping some information
into an email message,
you want to cut and paste it, like,
why is this object showing up
here when I don't understand it,
to send that to us so we
can explain it to you.
We have a command line
version called I/O Reg,
and this is sort of a BSD-style
command line utility that you can run.
By default, it just gives you a list of
which drivers are out there.
You can also give it an option to
actually give you all the drivers
and all of their properties,
and it will spew a
tremendous amount of text.
But it's a very powerful way to
figure out what's in the system.
Look at it before you load your
driver and after to verify that
your driver is matching where
you expect it to and present.
So, very, very powerful tool both during
development and actually as a mechanism
for communicating with your driver.
Which leads us into the
user kernel boundary.
Now, as I said before,
drivers are inside the kernel and users
and applications are outside the kernel.
So obviously,
we've got to bridge this user kernel
boundary for I/O to be of any use
at all in the operating system.
So we have several mechanisms at
our disposal in the Mac OS X kernel.
System calls, and by this I mean sort of
the BSD-style system call.
This is also how networking communication
works using the socket system calls.
We also have a Mach inter-process
communication that's available,
and we have Mach shared memory.
I/O Kit uses all of these mechanisms
at various times to communicate
between user space and the kernel.
And in most of these cases,
we try to wrap this with family code.
So inside the kernel,
it's buried inside of a family,
and in user space,
it's buried inside of a library.
So you don't have to actually
get at the guts of this.
If you have special
communication requirements
between user and kernel space,
then you might actually have to
get at these mechanisms directly.
And I direct you to Darwin.
There's a rich source of
examples of how to do this,
because all three of these are used.
Well, in I/O Kit,
we really are trying to push
a wrapped version of those
mechanisms that is a little cleaner.
We call it the user-client model.
And by user-client,
that name is really from
a kernel perspective.
And what this means is
I am a kernel driver,
and I have a client that's
actually in user space.
So this is part of the
I/O Kit infrastructure,
the main framework.
And the cool thing is,
from a driver-writer's perspective,
you don't have to do anything different.
A user client looks
like an internal client.
But from an application's viewpoint,
it looks like a library or a CF plug-in.
And effectively,
we've written both of the pieces of code
and wrapped the transmission mechanism,
and you just make use of the
simple APIs that you already
would be doing in kernel anyway.
And you have a communication mechanism.
And as I said,
if you have additional requirements
for low bandwidth communication,
you can hijack get property set property.
If you have requirements for other
high bandwidth communication,
then you're probably going to
have to do something like shared
memory or some other mechanism.
If you need something, let us know.
Give us the feedback.
Because again, as I said,
I/O Kit is a framework there to help
you make your drivers easy to write.
And if you need it, there's a good chance
somebody else needs it.
And if it looks like we've got a
community of developers that need
a service we're not providing,
we'll try to add that in.
The other thing that's important,
as I described earlier,
the matching process of
I/O Kit starts at the bottom,
the platform expert,
and matches up as we discover devices,
we load and add new drivers.
Well,
user client reaches down from user land.
The kernel can't really go
out and find an app and say,
"Oh,
I bet you need to talk to me." It really
has to happen the other way around.
So the application has to
request the connection.
So here's how it works.
First, the application is going
to find the target driver,
and it does this by looking
in the I/O registry.
It will, again,
it'll search for something
of a given class,
or it'll search for
something with properties.
But once it finds the
driver it's interested in,
it generates a connection request
through the appropriate user client.
That causes a temporary kernel
object to be created to act as the
kernel half of that communication.
And from that point on, the user,
application,
and the client are going to be
able to connect to the driver.
And then the application has access
to communicate with the device.
If the user application dies
unexpectedly or exits normally,
the Mach kernel will notice the fact
that that communication pathway no
longer has any user space listeners
and will clean up all resources.
So you don't have to worry
about an application dying,
leaving some device in
an inaccessible state.
This is part of our push to make sure
that one app can't affect another app.
Okay, so that was really the high-level
overview of how I/O Kit is put together.
Now I want to give you a roadmap
of where we're going and show
you what other sessions are
going to be of interest to you.
So, in DP4,
we have driver loading and unloading,
and that's available for
a number of families.
Actually, it's available for any family
you can write a driver for.
Plug and Play and Hot Swap are
there now and implemented for USB,
FireWire, and storage,
and we'll be making it available
a little bit more widely.
But it really depends on
the semantics of the family.
Right now, we don't have the
ability to hot swap PCI,
so we don't have hot swap
capabilities in the PCI family.
As those technologies become important,
we'll extend families to deal with that.
And device power management
has been implemented for screen
dimming and for drive spin down.
We'll be coming to
other families shortly.
This is something we're pushing
on rather aggressively right now.
We actually had done a lot of
work that was not ready for DP4.
So we didn't want to risk
destabilizing DP4 by dumping
in changes at the last minute.
But it is, we've made actually quite a
lot of progress and we'll be
coming out with that soon.
And there are many families in DP4.
As I said earlier,
we're going to be pushing out another
KDK for you to install on top of DP4.
And so we're going to provide
updates for a few families.
And we're going to add more documentation
and examples beyond what you see in DP4.
And there'll be more user clients.
This is another area we're pushing.
Right now in DP4,
the primary user clients for storage
have been there for a while because
it's necessary to get at disks.
But we really only had direct
device access for USB devices.
In June, we hope to add SCSI and
possibly some others as well.
Then the public beta this summer,
we will have boot time driver loading.
Right now, kernel extensions have to be
loaded after the system comes up,
because the mechanism through which
we load them requires a system
folder effectively to be mounted.
But we're adding that capability
into the booter so that in future
versions you won't have to have
your drivers built into the kernel,
which I know is going to be
very difficult for most of you.
So, boot time driver loading is coming.
Full device and system power management.
As I said before,
we've got a strong push going on here.
And also more families and user clients.
So now I'm going to walk through
each of the families and just
give you some status and pointers.
For the SCSI family,
this is of particular interest to
people writing SCSI controller drivers.
So if you're writing a parallel
SCSI controller driver,
you're going to need to inherit
from a class in this family.
It also provides SCSI device access.
So if you are writing a driver
that talks to the SCSI bus,
then you're also going to
care about this family.
You won't be inheriting from it,
but you will be communicating
with its abstraction.
So you will be including
headers that it provides.
So it was in the alpha KDK that
we shipped in February,
and it's also in DP4.
It's effectively final.
We expect a few minor changes,
a few bug fixes, and maybe adding some
additional helper functions.
But by and large,
you can consider what's in there,
what we intend to ship for SCSI.
So you should be able
to make progress there.
So there is not presently a
user client available for it.
That will be available in June.
It has been HeaderDoc'd.
It has been open sourced.
And there are example drivers in Darwin.
So if you're developing this area,
you should be fairly good to go.
We recommend going to session
108 on Friday morning.
We're going to actually not be
spending a tremendous amount of
time talking about SCSI controllers,
but we will be talking about
the infrastructure needed for
writing a peripheral driver,
a storage peripheral driver.
So if you're writing a SCSI disk
driver or some description,
this would be a good session for you.
The ATA and ATAPI family is, again,
of interest to you if you're
writing a controller for ATA.
And it also is of interest to you if
you're writing a device driver that
needs to communicate through the ATA bus,
either as an ATA or an ATAPI device.
It is in DP4 and, like SCSI,
only has minor changes left,
some cleanup and some bugs removed,
as you would expect.
But you should be able
to make progress there.
We expect to have a user client in June.
This is not quite as far along,
so this is a little bit
softer of a promise,
but this will be particularly
for a TAPI devices.
I don't think we intend to export
ATA devices outside the kernel.
It is not yet HeaderDoc'd, but will be.
It is open sourced and
there are example drivers,
so you should be able to at
least look at them and...
[Transcript missing]
So FireWire and SPP2 are obviously
of great importance to Apple.
And for those of you that don't know,
SPP2, Serial Bus Protocol 2,
is a sort of a CDB or command descriptor
based mechanism for delivering
command packets over the FireWire bus.
And a large number of devices are
SPP2 devices other than camcorders.
So like SCSI, or excuse me,
FireWire disk drives are typically SPP2.
You will care about this family if
you're writing a FireWire controller
or if you're trying to gain access
to a FireWire or an SPP2 device.
This is in DP4.
There's going to be more
provided in the June KDK.
And again,
it's mostly done--we're syncing
up with development that's
been done against Mac OS 9.
Those teams are bringing some
bug fixes forward that we
didn't have in our code base.
So coming soon, we hope to have basically
parity with what Mac OS 9 has.
So, as I said, for ATA and a TAPI,
we're only providing a
TAPI as a user client.
Same is true with FireWire.
We only intend to allow
SPP2 as a user client,
because FireWire is really
a memory bus protocol,
and for security reasons,
we don't want to expose
that out into user space.
It's not yet HeaderDoc'd,
but it is open sourced,
and there are examples,
and we will be documenting it soon.
So there are two FireWire sessions
coming up tomorrow and Thursday.
If you're interested at all in FireWire,
I recommend you attend these.
The in-depth session in
particular will be talking about
I/O Kit drivers for FireWire.
The USB family.
If you're writing a
USB controller driver,
then you will need to
subclass from code in here.
If you are attempting
to access a USB device,
then you also need to include
headers from this family.
Again, it's mostly done.
We're syncing up with some development
effort that had gone on for Mac OS 9,
but we, again,
hope to have parity there soon.
It was in the Alpha KDK last February.
It's in DP4 today,
and there will be more coming in June.
So there is a user client for it.
It was there back in February.
So from an application,
you can find and talk
to USB devices directly.
It's not yet HeaderDoc'd,
but we are working on that.
It is open sourced,
and it does have example drivers.
So you should be able to poke
around and figure out what
we're doing there quite easily.
So there's a USB session.
There's not going to be a lot of depth
here about writing USB I/O Kit drivers,
I believe,
but we'll give you some more pointers.
The PCI and AGP families,
family singular,
is what you would use for
getting access to a PCI device.
And also, if you're writing a
PCI or AGP bus controller,
you're going to inherit from this,
but I expect that's mostly
for Apple at this point.
And it's considered
feature complete in DP4.
Obviously,
there's always going to be bugs to fix,
but it's basically there.
So we don't intend to
create a user client.
We don't expect for applications to
directly generate PCI bus cycles.
Again, it's a security issue,
and it's not something we
actually see as that useful.
There are a few cases where it might be.
But any time you need
to talk to a PCI device,
you should write a driver
that lives inside the kernel.
It is HeaderDoc'd, it is open sourced,
and there are samples.
So just after this, there is a session on
PCI and Open Firmware.
There actually is going to
be a demonstration of the
I/O Registry Explorer application
that I discussed earlier.
And they're going to go into
a good bit of detail about
how to get at PCI resources.
So serial and telephony.
This family today really
only supports serial modems,
AT-style serial modems.
In the future,
we want to have USB modem support,
feature phones, who knows?
There's a lot that can be done here.
But what we have in DP4 is not
what we expect to be final.
It's actually not even structured very
much like what we expect to be final.
So if you have telephone or serial needs,
then DP4 is probably not
going to get you very far.
We do have support for AT-style modems
and basic PPP connectivity in there.
But from a developer perspective,
there's not much you can do.
It does have a user client.
That is,
you can go through the /dev/tty interface
to get at serial ports Unix style.
So it is not the final
way we want to do this.
It's not HeaderDoc'd.
And by the way,
when I put this slide together,
it was not open sourced.
It actually now is.
So if you go out to Darwin,
you can see the current serial drivers,
which then also implies
that they're examples.
This is not what we intend to be final,
but it does work.
And if you need to have a serial
product working in the near term,
you should build on what we've done.
So I'm going to talk a little
bit more about telephony in the
early part of the networking
hardware session on Friday morning.
Again,
there's not a whole lot to say there
because it's mostly in the future,
but it will give you a little
more idea of what's going on.
ADB family,
not particularly interesting at
this stage in Apple's evolution,
but if you're wanting
to write an ADB dongle,
then say a USB to ADB dongle driver,
then you're going to need to subclass
from the ADB controller class.
And if you're wanting to
talk to an ADB device,
then you're going to need to
communicate with an I/O ADB device
by looking at that header.
It's basically complete at this point.
It's pending review.
As I said,
it's not our top priority at this point
because we're obviously focusing forward
on technologies like USB and FireWire,
but we need to review it and close
it out so we can say this is done.
We don't expect any major changes,
and if it's reviewed in time,
it may be in the June KDK.
So it's not yet HeaderDoc'd.
It does have a user client,
and it is open sourced.
Not a whole lot more to stay there.
The storage family,
this is kind of a long buzzword,
but we don't want to say disks because,
you know, they're solid state storage
and other forms of storage.
So persistent mass storage devices.
How's that not offending anybody?
Storage family is used to represent
both the drives and the media.
And we distinguish between the
two of them in I/O Kit because
it's very important.
Obviously, with removable media,
the drive sticks around,
but the media goes.
Or in FireWire,
sometimes the whole drive goes.
And it's important to
know the difference.
You're going to care about this if
you're writing a partition scheme,
if you're writing a new disk drive,
if you are trying to do software arrayed.
This is where you're going to look.
The infrastructure is
basically complete in DP4.
We are, as I said,
continuing to do some bug
fixes and some enhancements,
but what's there is basically
what's going to be there.
And you should be able to make progress.
So it does have a user client.
The stated mechanism for getting
at storage devices in Mac OS X is
through /dev/disk whatever.
This is the way the mechanism that
the file system is used to get at it.
And it goes through
the Unix buffer cache,
which provides a lot of
performance benefits.
So that is what we consider
the user client for storage.
That being said, all of the drivers,
all the storage drivers,
are visible in the registry.
And you can find them
and do get property,
set property on them.
But the way that you actually get data
on and off the disk is through /dev.
It is HeaderDoc'd, it is open sourced,
and there are examples.
So this family is actually in
very good shape and you should
be able to make progress here.
First thing, Friday morning,
for you early birds, 9:00 AM.
We're going to go through this in depth.
This session is pretty meaty and
really talks about the details of
how you fit your code into the stack.
HID family is not particularly far along.
Human Interface Devices is
something that we support now,
and we do a fairly good job of it,
but it's not as flexible
as we'd like it to be.
So what we have in there today is
temporary until HID Manager comes along.
And for those of you
familiar with Input Sprocket,
HID Manager is the evolution of that,
and there's going to be a
session to talk about this.
So since what we have today is
relatively primitive compared to
what we want with HID Manager,
I believe we'll be able to
provide backwards compatibility.
So if you do any work here,
we'll see what we can do to allow
you to continue to work even
once HID Manager comes along.
We don't have a user client.
It's not HeaderDoc'd yet,
but it is open sourced,
and there are examples out on Darwin,
so if you want to poke around,
I certainly encourage you to do that.
This session,
Input Devices for Applications,
I believe we'll be talking a
little bit about the direction
we want to go with HID Manager.
Graphics family, frame buffers,
2D accelerators, 3D accelerators.
It's not quite finished.
This is very complex,
and we've been working hard, as you know,
on OpenGL, getting the performance
where we want it to be,
or at least getting it to work,
and then starting to get
performance where we want it to be.
So this family has been
evolving to catch up with that.
We do have support for NDRVs
to sort of bootstrap you.
We don't intend for your graphics
NDRV to be your final solution
because there's no acceleration there,
and I'm guessing customers are not
going to rush out and buy graphics
cards that aren't accelerated.
So you're going to need to do more work,
but at least you can get pixels on
the screen very easily if you have
a reasonably well-behaved NDRV.
So it's not there for you yet.
It is open-sourced,
so you can poke around
at the source code,
but we don't really have a
DDK for you in graphics yet.
So there are a number of sessions
here in graphics overview
and OpenGL that would apply.
And the audio family.
We have a version in DP4 that's very
close to what we intend to ship.
We know we're cleaning
it up a little bit.
We went through an API review
that just missed getting
the final version into DP4,
but we are going to get it into the
KDK that we're shipping next month.
So if you're into audio, look there,
look in DP4, and watch the developer
website for updates.
So it's not HeaderDoc'd yet,
but everything else is
basically there for you to go.
And there's two sessions on Friday that
will give you a lot more detail.
In fact, the 177 audio drivers is going
to outline the architecture
that we intend to be final,
not the architecture that's in DP4,
which, as I said,
are similar but not identical.
So this is the more
forward-looking approach.
Network family.
It's considered,
at least for Ethernet devices,
as complete in DP4.
In the future, we may consider adding
support for other interfaces,
but this is not my decision.
This is just a framework
mechanism that we can add them
to as the demand appears or not.
So there is a user client for networking.
It's Sockets.
There's a whole stack that lives
inside the kernel that acts as the
primary client for network drivers.
And Sockets is its mechanism
for communicating with apps.
The network family is HeaderDoc'd.
It is open sourced.
And there are examples.
We also have a cookbook
which is coming together.
And in this session on Friday morning,
actually we'll be seeing the example
driver and some discussion there about
how that cookbook is coming along.
Thanks, everyone.
PC Card family is under development.
It's going to allow you to
write controller drivers for
PC Card socket drivers and also
allow you to access PC Card devices.
It is derived actually as one of the few
pieces of I/O Kit that actually has been
imported from the open source community.
It's being heavily recrafted to
fit into the way I/O Kit works,
but it's leveraging heavily
what's gone on for Linux.
So we don't intend to have
a user client for this.
Again, for memory buses,
we tend not to want to expose those in
the user space for security reasons.
But as it's under development,
we don't have anything
present for you yet.
So imaging devices are
not part of I/O Kit.
Printers and scanners and
cameras get to their hardware
by talking through I/O Kit,
but they are user-land entities.
So I recommend going to one or more
of these sessions to learn more
about how software to drive imaging
devices gets plugged into the system.
So in summary, I/O Kit is real.
There are several companies, not Apple,
there are several companies out there
that have working I/O Kit drivers today.
I've seen them,
they haven't shipped them yet because
they don't really have a platform
on which to ship them against,
but you can expect to see them coming.
Now, I/O Kit isn't finished by any means.
There's more work to
be done in many areas,
there's certainly more
documentation to be done.
But I would recommend very strongly
that you look at what's there and
figure out what you can do today,
because your competitors
may be farther along,
and you really don't want to give
them the opportunity to have an
uncontested market in the beginning
of a new operating system launch.
So I strongly recommend that you take
advantage of what is there today and
make as much progress as you can.
So on both DP3 and DP4,
all I/O goes through I/O Kit.
It's all open sourced.
I/O Kit is real.
It's working.
If you've got DP4 running on
your PowerBook in your lap,
it's going through I/O Kit.
So we can't stress enough that
it's there and really working,
and you can make progress just like
Apple has and other companies have too.
So with this, I'd like to hand the
mic over to John Signa.
Thank you, Dean.
We have just a few minutes to go
before we have to wrap this up.
But beforehand,
what I wanted to do was talk a little
bit about the resources that we are
providing and where you should go next.
First of all, as Dean mentioned heavily
throughout his presentation,
we do have the Darwin open
source available to you.
While code isn't exactly the
same thing as documentation,
it does give you very good
insights as to what's going on.
And it gives you actually some very good
examples of what we're doing down there.
As far as Mac OS X Developer Preview 4,
it's actually nice to be able
to actually be at one of these
conferences and say the DDK is
going to be shipping this summer.
Well, it's actually nice to say
that it's shipping now.
So, actually, on your CD,
you will find the I/O Kit DDK.
You'll find in the documentation folder,
you'll find the tutorials,
you'll find a bunch of the header
documentation and so forth.
Please take a look at that
and get started with that.
And finally, for future updates,
I'm going to refer you to check
the Mac OS X developer page on the
Apple Developer Connection website.
Any notifications about updates
or changes that we're doing,
we'll have a notification
up there telling you how
to get to the new packages.
The one other resource
that we do have available,
and I actually did want to spend
a little bit of time clarifying,
is we will be hosting several
I/O Kit kitchens throughout between
now and the time Mac OS X ships,
and actually even beyond that.
I do want to set some expectations,
however.
First, when we have I/O Kit kitchens,
they will be family-focused.
Because the differences between
storage drivers and input device
drivers are very different.
You can't just put them in the same
room and expect to support them all.
So they are going to
be very family-focused.
We'll have a storage family kitchen,
we'll have a display card kitchen,
along that line.
Also,
we do have a limited number of attendees.
So because of this, I can't just post a
notice out there saying,
OK, everyone that wants to come
to the Display Card Kitchen,
come.
Because I'd get 6,000 responses saying,
yes, I want to be there.
And we want to ensure that we
get some of the key players in
there that are really important
to the majority of the customers.
So what we'll be doing is actually
a balance between companies that are
very prominent out in that particular
field and companies that we feel have
interesting products that need to
come onto the platform very early.
We're trying to support as
many developers as we can.
However,
we do have to make some limitations.
So the best way to find out
about I/O Kitchens is to actually
just keep us informed of what
you're doing with your products.
If we don't know what products
you are coming out with,
we can't invite you to
the appropriate kitchens.
I've already had it happen to me already
that one company came to me and said,
oh, I wish I was at that kitchen.
I was like, I didn't know you were doing
anything in that space.
So please keep us informed
of what you're doing.
And as we have appropriate kitchens,
we may be sending invitations for them.
So I'm doing a little bit more.
Normally we just put
up your email address,
but I'm also putting up
my snail mail address.
Because if you want,
please put me on your mail
list for product literature.
I do devour that stuff.
I actually have a full
file cabinet full of it.
And I do pass it along to engineering.
So just keep us informed on what
you're doing with your products.
And with that,
I'm going to go ahead and we're
going to go into some Q&A.